# External Sort

- This C++ program implements external sorting using a priority queue and file handling. It efficiently handles large datasets that do not fit into memory by dividing them into chunks, sorting each chunk in memory, and then merging the sorted chunks into a single output file.

## Overview

- External sorting is crucial when dealing with datasets that are too large to fit into the available memory. The program takes an input file, divides it into chunks, sorts each chunk in-memory using a priority queue, and finally merges the sorted chunks into a single output file.

## Usage

- To use this program, follow these steps:

1. Compile the code:
g++ -o external_sort external_sort.cpp

2. Run the executable:
./external_sort inputFilePath outputFilePath

Replace inputFilePath with the path to your unsorted input file and outputFilePath with the desired path for the sorted output file.

A Python script (generate_input.py) is provided to generate a sample unsorted input file.

'''
    RUNNING INSTRUCTIONS:
    $ python3 generate_input.py <seed_value> <unsorted_file_name> <number_of_values> <no_of_digits>

    PARAMETER DESCRIPTION:
    <seed_value> : It is an integer value that dictates the random number generation. For some fixed seed value, the sequence of random numbers generated will always be same.
    <unsorted_file_name> : This is the filename that you would like to give to the unsorted file that is being generated.
    <number_of_values> : This denotes the number of values that need to be written into the generated file.
    <no_of_digits> : This parameter sets the max number of digits in the values generated by Random Number Generator.

    EXAMPLE:
    $ python3 generate_input.py 69420 input.txt 100000000 10
    
    This will generate file named "input.txt" which has 100000000 numbers with each having maximum of 10 digits. This file will be around 1GB in size. 
    You can play around with the values to generate different files.
'''

## Working
- The program reads the input file in chunks, each containing 10 million numbers (chunkSize).
- Each chunk is sorted in-memory using a priority queue.
- The sorted chunks are written to temporary files.
- The program then merges the temporary files to produce the final sorted output.

## Performance
- The program includes a timer that records the execution time, providing insights into its efficiency.
